---
title: test
tags:
---
### College freshman are taught Java, and they're stuck with it
When I started as a freshman, I didn't think too much about learning Java is our intro to CS class. It is still a widely used language in the industry, is object-oriented, and is rather high-level and therefore relatively easier to get a grasp of. While our CS department and many others feel this is a good language for introducing us to computer science and programming, I have developed an opposing opinion over the years and I'll explain why in a bit. Let's take a quick look at how the CS degree works at my university.

At our university, if you were a CS major you started off with Java, and you'll be using it for the next two years in most of the major classes. It is only around the junior/senior year where you begin to branch out to other languages. I did a lightning talk at my local [freeCodeCamp](http://www.fccokc.com/) meetup about my experience with learning to code in college. I mentioned how we're introduced to the world of computer science with Java, and as a result, many of us unwittingly became stuck in a mindset of "How can I program this in Java?" as opposed to "How can I solve this problem and how could I use programming to help me?". I myself was quite a victim of this trap, and we don't really get to experience other languages until our junior year.

### Language Straying
For me, I dived into another language during a summer intership before I entered my junior year. The language I ended up learning, JavaScript, is an interpreted language. As such, it is higher level than Java and abstracts away quite a bit more. While the language definitely has its share of quirks, I quickly grew to love the language. It was much less verbose than Java, meaning I could write much nicer, more elegant looking code, even if it wasn't necessarily more efficient.

In one of my classes from last semester, we got the opportunity in one class to briefly look at two new languages (to us): Python and Lisp. We were introduced to the concepts of scripting languages and functional languages. Having done a lot of JavaScript by then, I was very confident with Python and it was quite a breeze for me. Lisp on the other hand... not so much. I think I typed more parantheses in that class than I did in my life. It seems like most schools teach Haskell as an intro to functional programming, but our professor was a pretty big emacs user, which I'm pretty sure influenced his decision to choose Lisp over Haskell. We also had to computer organization in another class, in which we used an assembly language to write a simple loop program, which was rather interesting, but definitely not fun.

Now in my senior year, I finally got around to taking our Intro to Operating Systems class (I switched majors into CS late). This meant I had to learn C. While I had used C++ a couple of years back during Data Structures, I never got a good handle on the language since we weren't hand-held through the course, meaning now I'm going through books and other online resources to brush up on my C knowledge before we really get into using it.

### So why not Java
So, why do I think Java isn't a good choice for newcomers to the CS and programming scene? My opinion comes from having learned Java, C++, Python, and Lisp in school, while also having learned JavaScript, C, and a bit of Ruby on my own.

#### Start with one end or the other
I feel like in terms of high/low level, Java sits somewhat comfortably in the middle. It's definitely not as low level as Assembly or C where you get to work with bare metal. But it's also not as high level as Python or Ruby, since it still needs to be compiled and is strongly typed.

Instead of starting with Java which resides in some kind of middle ground, I believe starting with either end of the spectrum and working your way to the other end makes more sense. Either you learn about the tedious work involved in writing C and dealing with allocating and freeing memory, and from there slowly see how languages progressively get more convenient to write in. Or go the other way around: start with something like JavaScript or Python and learn the basics of programming without getting caught on the syntax, and slowly work down to the metal as your understanding grows.

I've recently been watching the CS50 course online taught by David Malan at Stanford, which is a popular online introductory CS course. Not that I needed a refresher on my introductory topics, but they use C for a good while. I found the way the course was structured really interesting. The first week, students are introduced to Scratch, a visual programming language developed by MIT. Here, we get some exposure to what programming is like without having to deal with scary syntax and just executing commands with drag-and-drop puzzle pieces.

Once students are familiarized with things like printing things to the screen with the `say` block and repeating actions with the `repeat` block, they are then introduced to C in the next lecture. Now that students already understand the basic concepts of conditionals and loops, it's simply a matter of teaching them the syntax. The course then quickly moves on with dealing with memory, pointers, arrays, simple data structures. By then, students are familiar with how to use pointers to weave memory together into more complex data structures. Now that they have known the tedium of manipulating memory, allocating space for arrays, etc., then they are slowly introduced to Python and how it abstracts away much of the work. The course really brings the students from working with the metal in C before going up to the higher level Python language, and I believe that understanding how C works builds strong fundamentals when working with Python rather than blindly attributing things to "magic".